<!-- DOCUMENT HISTORY:
  this markdown file was generated with pandoc v. 2.8 on 20200624
  input source: docx, exported from this GoogleDoc:
  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lID4BmrA87YebTJRmCebgB8mXANeOytEML_MV5n12fo/edit?usp=sharing

  markdown headings, lists, and other formatting conventions are supplied manually
  subsequently re-generated as GitHub-flavored Markdown, again with pandoc
  this fixes rendering of tables and other document formatting on GitHub
-->

*These guidelines are based on the work of the Bibliotheca
Philadelphiensis Project. The original Bibliotheca Philadelphiensis
documentation may be viewed
[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lID4BmrA87YebTJRmCebgB8mXANeOytEML_MV5n12fo/edit?usp=sharing)*

# Style Guide

The purpose of the following guidelines is to insure consistency of
style, terminology, format, and data type in cataloguing data and
descriptions. Consistency here means regularity, predictability,
uniformity, and “searchability.” Users of this digitized catalogue
should expect to find the same amount and type of data in each entry
field, and in the same general order.

Consistency in all fields is particularly important for manuscripts of
the same title: Bible, Gospels, Missal, Lectionary, Book of Hours, etc.

For details on what information should be included in specific fields
please refer to the [Item-Level Metadata
Guidelines](https://github.com/midwest-manuscripts/peripheralmss/blob/master/documentation/item-level-metadata-guide.md)
and [Page-Level Metadata
Guidelines](https://github.com/midwest-manuscripts/peripheralmss/blob/master/documentation/page-level-metadata-guide.md).

## Sentences and Fragments

The **Description** field is the only entry field to be composed in full
sentences (use present tense verbs). All other fields should be in
phrases or fragments, except where the meaning becomes confusing and
difficult to express without a full sentence.

## Capitalization, Spacing, Punctuation

Capitalize the initial letter of all entries in all fields. Avoid using
unnecessary abbreviations; do not abbreviate the word “Saint.” Single
space (not double) between sentences.

Punctuation follows American usage and goes inside quotation marks: “…
Gothic.” Period at end of full sentences only, not phrases or fragments
(as here)

Avoid unnecessary use of colons in entries.

Semi-colon to separate elements of a fragment

Serial (Oxford) comma: red, white, and blue

If one element in a series of three or more itself consists of a series
of three or more, use a semi-colon, rather than a comma, between
elements of a greater series: 13 stripes; 52 stars; and a color scheme
of red, white, and blue

For capitalization, spacing, and punctuation in transcriptions of medieval documents, see under [Incipit and Explicit](https://github.com/midwest-manuscripts/peripheralmss/blob/master/documentation/page-level-metadata-guide.md#inc-and-exp).

## Titles

References to modern publications are formated in Chicago style.

Book types, e.g., Psalter, Lectionary,
Book of Hours, Book of Hours Use of Rome, Missal etc. should always be
capitalized in titles. This also applies to terms like Chronicle if it
is used in the sense of it being that type of book, and not just a word
in the title, e.g., Grandes Chroniques

## Numbers and Dates

Numbers should be spelled out from one to one hundred in running text
(like the description and longer descriptive passages). After one
hundred, use numerals. Also spell out round numbers: two thousand, but
2,341. Exceptions include numbers in chapters, volumes, verses: chapter
6, volume 2, verse 7

Avoid beginning an entry with a number, but if a number is necessary,
spell it out: Thirty-seven full-page illuminations and 103 historiated
initials

Spell out ordinal numbers: first, not 1<sup>st</sup> ; this also applies
to centuries within text fields: the fourteenth century; a
fourteenth-century manuscript

An exception: in the date narrative field **only**, use the following
format for a century date: 9<sup>th</sup> century

Hyphenate a century only if it is an adjective: a tenth-century
palimpsest (Otherwise: a palimpsest from the tenth century)

Use a hyphen, not a dash, to separate dates in a date range:
9<sup>th</sup>-11<sup>th</sup> century CE

For a birth or death date (e.g., of an author, scribe, patron etc.),
leave a space between the abbreviation and the year: d. 968

For an approximate date, do not abbreviate circa: circa 1400. Circa date
should be only in the Date (narrative) field. Circa date (without
“circa”) should also be in the Date (single) field.

## Citations and Abbreviations

Biblical citations: Exodus 10:12-15 (names of chapters should not be
abbreviated, so spell out “Genesis,” not “Gen.”)

Preferred abbreviation for folio: fol. (plural: fols.)

There is a space between a folio abbreviation and a folio number:
fol. 5r

Always include ‘r’ or ‘v’ with folio number, e.g., fols. 1r-3v, not
1-3v. When indicating a range over the recto/verso of a single folio:
fol. 1r-v

Preferred abbreviation for manuscript/manuscripts: Ms./Mss.

## Terms and Terminology

These are particularly for **Description,** and **Decoration** fields:
Recommended terms in **bold**

A bound book: **manuscript**

  - acceptable alternatives: codex (although a specialized term),
    volume, book (although this could lead to confusion with a printed
    text), copy (when referring to multiple manuscripts of same text)
  - *not* recommended: work, the present work

A book’s transcription: **copied**

  - acceptable alternatives: written, transcribed
  - *not* recommended: executed, calligraphed, penned

The text or writing on a book page: **written area**

  - acceptable alternatives: justification
  - *not* recommended: text block

Book page/pages: **folio/s** (when foliated) or **page/s** (when
paginated)

  - acceptable alternative (for folio only): leaf/leaves

The first (front) side of a book page: **recto**

The second (back or obverse) side of a book page: **verso**

A book’s final (scribal) note: **colophon**

A book’s decoration in general: **decoration, decorated**

  - acceptable alternatives: illumination, illuminated
  - *not* recommended: ornamentation, gilded

A book’s text painting/s in general: **illustration, illustrated,
miniature**

  - acceptable alternatives: painting, painted

A book’s opening, full-page decoration without text: **illuminated** (or
**illustrated) frontispiece**

A book’s opening, full-page decoration including initial text:
**illuminated incipit**

The space/s outside the written area: **margin/s**.
Margins may be specified as **inner**, **outer**, **upper**, and **lower**.

  - *not* recommended: border

An unnamed or unknown scribe: **anonymous**

Subjective adjectives and qualitative judgments (famous, well-known,
great, elegant, clear) should be used sparingly throughout.
